Sources data model (#11)
Informo/specs: content/information-distribution/source.md

---

A source is an entity holding the responsibility of publishing information
through the Matrix room. Each source **must** be a registered Matrix user. A

> Matrix user **must not** register more than one source.

Reviewer: It's more a limitation rather than a rule. One source <=> one user, one user <=> one source.

Author: In this case the limitation *is* the rule imho.

Reviewer: At fist glance I thought you explained the same rule with two different approaches, which is not the case, as "Each source **must** be a registered Matrix user" could be considered true if a user was acting as multiple sources.

I think the underlying rule is something like "sources are special users" or "there is a 1 to 1 link between a user and a source". Tell me what you think ;)

Author: The intention here was actually to explain that 1 to 1 link from each side in order to make sure it couldn't be misunderstood.

Reviewer: I'd rephrase it `Each source **must** be a registered Matrix user, and a Matrix user **must not** register more than one source, i.e. there is a one to one correspondence between a source and its Matrix user.` just to be sure

Author: Sounds good to me.

Before publishing any information, a source **must** register itself as such on

> the room. This **must** be done through the publication of a state event of the

Reviewer: This is already covered differently in https://github.com/Informo/specs/blob/master/content/information-distribution/article.md#matrix-event-networkinformoarticle
> If the sender is not a source user, the article should be ignored. If the source registers itself afterwards, its previously sent articles should become visible.

Author: Indeed. Though I'd consider this piece of info as belonging in the source's description rather than the article's.

`network.informo.source` type. The event's state key **must** be the ID of the
source's Matrix user. The content of this event **must** be provided using the
following model:

> |      Parameter      |    Type    | Req. |                                                        Description                                                       |

Reviewer: This table needs a `network.informo.source` title for better referencing

Author: :+1:

| ------------------- | ---------- | :--: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | `name`              | `string`   |  x   | Name of the source.                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: Source name must be localize-able, so that for example, a russian source (with cyrillic characters) can display an english name (with latin characters)

> | `origin`            | `string`   |  x   | The company or individual maintaining this source.                                                                       |

Reviewer: `origin` is a bit ambiguous IMO. Maybe `owner`, `administrator`, `maintainer`, ...

Author: Agreed. Will go with `owner`.

> | `langs`             | `[lang]`   |  x   | Languages of the source's publications.                                                                                  |

Reviewer: s/langs/localized_sources/ ?

Author: I'd rather go for `l10n`, which is more obvious than `langs` (and I don't really like the naming of `localized_sources` because it refers to sub-sources as sources).

| `sig_algo`          | `string`   |  x   | Algorithm the source will use to cryptographically sign its articles. 🔧                                                  |
| `sig_keys`          | `[string]` |  x   | Public keys the source will use to cryptographically sign its articles. 🔧                                                |
| `website`           | `string`   |      | URL of the source's website, if there's one.                                                                             |

> | `description`       | `string`   |      | Short description of the source and its publications.                                                                    |

Reviewer: Maybe we need to store description as a localized string, in order to allow a subsource provide specific information if it has different management, content policies, etc. than its other peer sources

> | `logo`              | `string`   |      | Logo of the source. If provided, must be a [`mxc://` URL](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.4.0.html#id112). |

Reviewer: maybe fallback to the matrix user's avatar?

Author: Good idea.

> | `custom`            | `object`   |      | Additional information for custom client implementations.                                                                |

Reviewer: Maybe add something about the source location or country, so users can filter the source list to show only sources related to his country

Author: Good idea.

 <!-- 🔧: Need to do some research on Megolm and Matrix APIs around encryption
 and key management -->

> Where `lang` is an object using the following model:

Reviewer: Why not relying on a mapping rather than an array of objects ?

Author: I considered both, and went with this one for no real reason, with the aim to have it changed if that point was raised during review. I'm changing it to a `lang:mxid` map.

|      Parameter      |    Type    | Req. |                                                                       Description                                                                        |
| ------------------- | ---------- | :--: | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `locale`            | `string`   |  x   | Identifier of the language (and variant) in which the articles are written. **Must** be compliant with [RFC 5646](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646).  |

> | `mxid`              | `string`   |  x   | The Matrix identifier of the sub-source publishing the articles. **Can** be the current source.                                                          |

Reviewer: What the point of being both a source and a sub-source? can you add an example?
Edit: After reading more I found the reason. Maybe the `**Can** be the current source` needs some precisions  /could be omitted / explained below this table

Author: I'm unsure about that, given that the table is instantly followed by

> More information on localisation is available [below](#localisation).

Isn't that enough in your opinion?

Reviewer: maybe `**Can** be the current source, more information [below](#localisation).` inside the table cell

or just `*More information [below](#localisation).`

Author: FTR this has already been addressed (imho) when changing the structure of the `lang` object.

The array of `lang` objects within the source's registration **must** contain at
least one element. More information on localisation is available
[below](#localisation).

> The registration event is the one being signed by [trust

Reviewer: What do you mean by "registration event" ? the first `network.informo.source` of a source, or any `network.informo.source` event sent by the source?

It's also a bit unclear what the signature generated by the TA will be used for.

Author: 1. Any `network.informo.source` event sent by the source. I'm rewording this so it's more obvious.
2. Ack, I'm adding an explanation to that too. FTR it's for trust management. The link in here refers to information doesn't exist yet (either as a proposal or as part of the specs), which is TAs registration and certification of sources' trustworthiness.

Author: Update: I'm not adding an explanation on how client implementations can use signatures as this piece of info belongs in the TAs section.

authorities](/trust-management/trust-authority). Each time one of the source's
properties changes, a new registration event **must** be published, and a new
signature **must** be generated by each of the trust authorities certifying the

> trustworthiness of this source.

Reviewer: rewording:
> Each time one of the source's properties changes, a new registration event **must** be published, and every trust authority certifying the trustworthiness this source **must** update their signatures accordingly.

Author: :+1:

## Compromission of cryptographic private keys

> A source **must** be trusted by trust authorities operated by organisms it

Reviewer: This is outside of your PR, but the `**must**` should be replaced with a `**should**`: A new source will not be trusted immediately by TAs (untrusted sources can exist but will be presented to the user as particularly unsafe)

Author: Agreed. Plus the whole trust management system must be considered optional. I'm rewording this into

> Every trust authority certifying a source's trustworthiness **must** be
> operating by an organism or individual the source trusts and is in contact with
> outside of Informo.

---

A source is an entity holding the responsibility of publishing information
through the Matrix room. Each source **must** be a registered Matrix user. A
Matrix user **must not** register more than one source.

A source **must** register itself as such on the room. This **must** be done
through the publication of a `network.informo.source` state event. The event's
state key **must** be the ID of the source's Matrix user. The content of this
event **must** be provided using the following model:

## Matrix event `network.informo.source`

|      Parameter      |        Type       | Req. |                                                              Description                                                            |
| ------------------- | ----------------- | :--: | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`              | `localisedString` |  x   | Name of the source.                                                                                                                 |

> | `owner`             | `string`          |  x   | The company or individual maintaining this source.                                                                                  |

Reviewer: maybe make it a localisedString too? (like if a they want to display their name in their native language version and a english/latin friendly version)

Author: Good idea.

| `custom`            | `object`          |      | Additional information for custom client implementations.                                                                           |

 <!-- 🔧: Need to do some research on Megolm and Matrix APIs around encryption
 and key management -->

Where:

* `localisedString` is a map associating a [RFC
  5646](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646)-compliant language (and variant)
  identifier to a localisation of the string in the language the identifier
  refers to.
* `lang` is a map associating a [RFC
  5646](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646)-compliant language (and variant)
  identifier to the Matrix user ID of the sub-source that handles the
  publication of articles in this language (and variant). This map **must**
  contain at least one element. More information on localised sub-sources and
  examples are available [below](#localisation).

Each time one of the source's properties changes, it **must** publish a new
registration event, and every trust authority certifying the trustworthiness of

> this source **must** update their signature by basing it on the new event. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this source **must** update their signature to match the new event. This
```

Author: Not sure about the phrasing of a signature matching something (as imho matching means equity, while signatures are either based or generated from content).

Author: FTR I rephrased it as `**must** generate a new signature from the new event`.

signature lives in a TA's registration event 📝.

If a source doesn't provide a logo, client implementations **can** use the
[avatar](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.4.0.html#get-matrix-client-r0-profile-userid-avatar-url)

> of its Matrix user in lieu of it if its avatar has been set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of its Matrix user instead.
```

I don't really like the `in lieu of it if its` (hard to read and to say).

Also I don't feel like saying `if its avatar has been set` is really useful, since it's already an optional fallback.

## Compromission of cryptographic private keys

Every trust authority certifying a source's trustworthiness **must** be

> operating by an organism or individual the source trusts and is in contact with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operated by an organism or individual the source trusts and is in contact with
```

outside of Informo. If at least one of a source's private keys gets compromised,
the source **must** update its list of public signature verification keys by
publishing a new registration event containing the updated list, and every trust
authority trusting the source **must** compute and issue a new signature taking
the updated list of keys into account. The reason behind this is to encourage
trust authorities to communicate with their trusted sources, estimate how much
compromised the source is (i.e. one key vs all of the keys vs the source's
entire Matrix account), and take the actions it deems necessary.

In such an event, client implementations **should** consider articles posted
prior to the key being declared as compromised as possibly, but not surely

> trustworthy.

Reviewer: I'm not sure of the meaning of this sentence.

I'd phrase it `consider articles posted prior to the key being declared as possibly compromised and not fully trustworthy.`, but I'm probably missing something.

Author: Let's consider the following example:

* Source `A` publish article `foo`
* Source `A`'s only public key gets compromised and has to change it

Here, `foo` will need to be considered as possibly not having been tampered with, but we can't be sure of that.

|      Parameter      |    Type    | Req. |                                  Description                                   |
| ------------------- | ---------- | :--: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `sig_algo`          | `string`   |  x   | Algorithm the sub-source will use to cryptographically sign its articles. 🔧    |
| `sig_keys`          | `[string]` |  x   | Public keys the sub-source will use to cryptographically sign its articles. 🔧  |
| `website`           | `string`   |      | URL of the source's website in this language, if there's one.                  |
| `description`       | `string`   |      | Short localised description of the source and its publications.                |
| `custom`            | `object`   |      | Additional information for custom client implementations.                      |

The parent source **must** then reference the sub-source in its own registration
event, as a `lang` object. The `lang` object **can** reference the source that
emitted the `network.informo.source` event, but a Matrix user ID **must not** be
referenced more than once in a source registration's whole array of `lang`

> objects.

Reviewer: you changed the `lang` array to be a map of language code => mxid ;)

Author: Whoops, forgot this one.

{{% notice info %}}
A source **can** register itself as one if its own sub-sources. In this case, it
doesn't need to emit any `network.informo.subsource` event for this specific
sub-source. The articles published by the source acting as one of its

> sub-sources **must** then be signed using the one of the source's public keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sub-sources **must** be signed using one of the source's public keys.
```

{{% /notice %}}

> If set, client implemetations **must** use the value for the `description` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If set, client implementations **must** use the value for the `description` and
```

`website` keys of the `network.informo.subsource` event instead of the localised
description and the website provided in the parent source's
`network.informo.source` event.

Client implementations **must** consider a sub-source as holding the same [trust
level](/trust-management/trust-level) as its parent source, and therefore

> **must** consider it at the same location in trust networks as its parent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**must** consider it at the same location in the trust network as its parent.
```

Author: Given that we already define a trust network as being either relative to an entity or global to the federation, the original phrasing makes the indication more generic imho.

### Example

> Considering the example of an example website publishing news only in English,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider an example website publishing news only in English,
```

Author: I don't like the idea of addressing the reader directly. I rephrased it as `Let's consider`.

Reviewer: even better :)

and registering itself as a source with the Matrix user id
`@acmenews:example.com`, and not registering any sub-source, the `lang` object
would look like this:

```
{
    "en": "@acmenews:example.com"
}
```

{{% notice tip %}}
In this example, `en-US`, `en-GB`, etc. can be used instead of `en` if the
source wants to explicitely specify language variants.
{{% /notice %}}

## Client implemetations behaviours regarding sources

> Client implementations **must** allow users to subscribe to all of the articles

Reviewer: I don't feel like this is a relevant obligation for client implementations: clients should be able to provide any kind of subscriptions to a source, like:
- All articles
- Articles published by specific authors
- Articles containing keywords
- ...

IMHO subscribing to all articles from a source is a feature clients should implement in order to cover the standard use case of informo, but they should also be allowed to implement other subscription techniques that could be more restrictive/secure/better than our standard "yolo get all the articles" solution

Author: Right, changing this into a `should`.

published by a specific source.

Client implemetations **can** display a source and all of its sub-sources as a
single entity with several languages available.

Client implemetations **should** allow users to set at least one preferred
language and use it to select the corresponding name and description for sources
that offer a name or a description in this language. If a source doesn't offer
either a name or a description in the user's preferred language, client

> implementations **can** select another language to fall back to by allowing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementations **can** select another language to fall back to, by allowing the
```

user to set a weighted list of preferred languages. If a source only provide its

> name or description in one language, client implemetations **must** use that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name or description in one language, client implementations **must** use that
```

value.

## Full example

Let's consider a news website, named "ACME News", publishing news in both
English and French, each on a localised website. We'll also consider
`@acmenews:example.com` its main Informo source, and `@acmenewsen:example.com`

> and `@acmenewsfr:example.com` its sub-sources, handling the publications of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and `@acmenewsfr:example.com` its sub-sources, handling the publication of
```

publishing articles in French.

## Alternate example

Let's consider a news website, named "ACME News", publishing news in both
English and French, each on a localised website. We'll also consider
`@acmenews:example.com` its main Informo source, and `@acmenewsfr:example.com`
its sub-source handling the publications of articles in French. The
publication of articles in English is done by ACME News's main source,
`@acmenews:example.com`.

Here are the state events it needs to emit to properly register all of its
sources.

#### `network.informo.source` event

|         Emitter         |        State key        |
| ----------------------- | ----------------------- |
| `@acmenews:example.com` | `@acmenews:example.com` |

```
{
    "name": "ACME News",
    "origin": "ACME News Group",
    "website": "https://www.example.com",
    "description": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.",
    "logo": "mxc://weu.informo.network/AtEuTuVSeIlZQgjEzjGyMDtG",
    "sig_algo": "ed25519",
    "sig_keys": [
        "IlRMeOPX2e0MurIyfWEucYBRVOEEUMrOHqn/8mLqMjA"
    ],
    "lang": {
        "en": "@acmenews:example.com",

> 		"fr": "@acmenewsfr:example.com"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "fr": "@acmenewsfr:example.com"
```

actions it deems necessary.

In such an event, client implementations **should** consider articles posted
prior to the key being declared as compromised as possibly, but not surely
trustworthy.

## Localisation

An information website might want to publish articles in more than one language.
In such case, it **can** create sub-sources, each of which handling the
publication of its articles in one language. A source, regardless of whether it
is a sub-source or not, **must not** publish articles in more than one language.

A sub-source is an entity similar to a source, with the exception that it

> **must** be related to a source. Each sub-source **must** be a registered Matrix

Reviewer: Maybe replace _related_ with _linked_ or _tied_ ?

Author: Rewording as

> it **must** be referenced to by a source

user, and **must** register itself on the Matrix room through the publication of

> a state event of the `network.informo.subsource` type, with the Matrix user's ID

Reviewer: Rewording:
```md
Each sub-source **must** be a registered Matrix user, and **must** register
itself as a sub-source on the Matrix room through the publication of a
`network.informo.subsource` state event, with the Matrix user's ID as the
event's state key
```

Author: Gotcha. Doing the same for `network.informo.source`.

as the event's state key. The event's content **must** be embedded in a [signed
Matrix event](/information-distribution/signature/#signed-matrix-event), signed
by one of the parent source's public keys, with its `signed` object using the
following model:

> |      Parameter      |    Type    | Req. |                                  Description                                   |

Reviewer: This table needs a `network.informo.subsource` title for better referencing

Author: :+1:

| ------------------- | ---------- | :--: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `sig_algo`          | `string`   |  x   | Algorithm the sub-source will use to cryptographically sign its articles. 🔧    |
| `sig_keys`          | `[string]` |  x   | Public keys the sub-source will use to cryptographically sign its articles. 🔧  |
| `website`           | `string`   |      | URL of the source's website in this language, if there's one.                  |
| `description`       | `string`   |      | Short localised description of the source and its publications.                |

> | `custom`            | `object`   |      | Additional information for custom client implementations.                      |

Reviewer: I think we should add a `super_source` field (or something like that). This would make much easier for implementations to retrieve the super source (otherwise they would need to parse the entire source list).

Author: I'd assume that case wouldn't happen very often, since in most cases you'd look for a localised version of a source (so going from the source to the sub-source) rather than for what source does a localised version belong.

I'd picture client implementations only going either "here are all of the localisations of that source" or "here are all of the sources that offer a localisation for that language", both of them being doable by processing only `network.informo.source` events.

IMHO, sub-sources would really only exist as a way to retrieve articles in a specific language rather than anything else.

Reviewer: I see two ways for implementing users' source subscriptions:
1. the client stores a list of matrix IDs containing both supersources and subsources. In this case you'd need some kind of link to go from the subsource to it's supersource to do the json field overriding or to list alternative languages for the subsource.
2. the client stores a list of matrix IDs containing only supersources and a locale key. In this case we wouldn't need a subsource to supersource link.

My approach was to provide a way to go from the subsource to the supersource in case we'd need it later.

I let you decide on this. We can always add it later during the spec process or first client implementation if needed.

Author: Gotcha. I'll add it just in case.

        "sig_algo": "ed25519",
        "sig_keys": [
            "Noh0oot2chahTheixeuviX6seidiweewahK/8mLeMjA"
        ]
    }
}
```

#### `network.informo.subsource`

|          Emitter          |         State key         |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| `@acmenewsfr:example.com` | `@acmenewsfr:example.com` |

```
{
    "algorithm": "ed25519",
    "sender_key": "IlRMeOPX2e0MurIyfWEucYBRVOEEUMrOHqn/8mLqMjA",
    "signature": "0a1df56f18d63ef1",
    "signed": {
        "website": "https://www.example.com/fr",
        "description": "Ceci est la source française d'ACME News.",
        "sig_algo": "ed25519",
        "sig_keys": [
            "xee1PahM1jutohz2jiec1keeshoW0GooVei/8mLeMjA"
        ]
    }
}
```

Once all of these events have been published, `@acmenewsen:example.com` can
start publishing articles in English, and `@acmenewsfr:example.com` can start
publishing articles in French.

## Alternate example

Let's consider a news website, named "ACME News", publishing news in both
English and French, each on a localised website. We'll also consider
`@acmenews:example.com` its main Informo source, and `@acmenewsfr:example.com`

> its sub-sources, handling the publications of articles in French. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its sub-source, handling the publications of articles in French. The
```

Author: Good catch. Apparently I copy-pasted too hastily.
